---
title: "FAQ"
excerpt: "FAQ"
date: 2021-06-11
toc: true
categories:
  - NOAA FIT
tags:
  - FAQ
  - NOAA resources
  - developer resources
---

If your question isn't answered below, [contact us](https://noaa-fisheries-integrated-toolbox.github.io/resources/noaa%20fit/contact/).

## How do I create a NOAA approved GitHub Account?

For setting up individual accounts, go to Github and create an account with your NOAA email account.

User-specific Account info:
- NOAA users must have a GitHub account using their NOAA email
- They must have a photo of themselves associated with the account
- They must use 2-factor authentication
- They can only have NOAA related work under their account

>Note: It is good practice that your GitHub user name for NOAA is FirstLast-NOAA, which clearly identifies it as an NOAA linked account versus a personal account.

## What are the guidelines for creating a repository ("repo") with my NOAA account?

Repository specific rules:
1. Only allow write access to NOAA users
2. All non-NOAA users can only have pull-request access
3. Must include a disclaimer in the README
4. Must include specific wording in License
5. Must have a “gold standard” backup of the repo (this means that you must have a version of the code backup on a NOAA server) 

> Note: Anything you put on the GitHub servers (on a free or paid account) should not contain private or confidential information

## How can I set administrative privileges on my repos?

One way to have more fine-grain admin privileges is to create an [organization](https://docs.github.com/en/organizations/collaborating-with-groups-in-organizations/about-organizations) in GitHub and add repositories to the organization. Github allows more admin ability under organizations.    

## How can I report bugs or suggest enhancements to tools in the toolbox?

See [Reporting bugs](https://noaa-fisheries-integrated-toolbox.github.io/resources/noaa%20fit/contributing/#reporting-bugs) and [Suggesting enhancements](https://noaa-fisheries-integrated-toolbox.github.io/resources/noaa%20fit/contributing/#suggesting-enhancements).

## What's the difference between RStudio Connect and a Shiny server? 

See [Share Web Applications with RStudio](https://noaa-fisheries-integrated-toolbox.github.io/resources/noaa%20resources/R-products/)
